Enhancing the Authorization of Web endpoints guide (#30419)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/security-authorization-of-web-endpoints-reference.adoc

include::_attributes.adoc[]
:categories: security,web

Quarkus has an integrated pluggable web security layer. If security is enabled, all HTTP requests will have a permission
check performed to make sure they are allowed to continue.

[NOTE]
====
Configuration authorization checks are executed before any annotation-based authorization check is done, so both
checks have to pass for a request to be allowed.
This means you cannot use `@PermitAll` to open up a path if the path has been blocked using `quarkus.http.auth.` configuration.

If you are using JAX-RS you may want to consider using the `quarkus.security.jaxrs.deny-unannotated-endpoints` or `quarkus.security.jaxrs.default-roles-allowed` to set default security requirements instead of HTTP path level matching, as annotations can override these properties on an individual endpoint.
====

Authorization is based on user roles that the security provider provides.
To customize these roles, a `SecurityIdentityAugmentor` can be created, see
xref:security-customization.adoc#security-identity-customization[Security Identity Customization].

== Authorization using configuration

> The default implementation allows you to define permissions using config in `application.properties`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default implementation allows you to define permissions using the configuration in `application.properties`.
```

> An example config is shown below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An example configuration is shown below:
```

This means you can not use `@PermitAll` to open up a path if the path has been blocked by using the `quarkus.http.auth.` configuration.

[NOTE]
====
If you are using JAX-RS, consider using `quarkus.security.jaxrs.deny-unannotated-endpoints` or `quarkus.security.jaxrs.default-roles-allowed` to set default security requirements instead of HTTP path level matching because annotations can override these properties on an individual endpoint.
====

Authorization is based on user roles that the security provider provides.
To customize these roles, a `SecurityIdentityAugmentor` can be created, see
xref:security-customization.adoc#security-identity-customization[Security Identity Customization].

== Authorization using configuration

Permissions are defined in the Quarkus configuration using permission sets, with each permission set specifying a policy for access control.

.{project-name} policies summary
|===
s| Built-in policy s| Description
s| `deny` | This policy denies all users.
s| `permit` | This policy permits all users.
s| `authenticated` | This policy permits only authenticated users.
|===

> It is possible to define role-based policies that will only allow users with the specified roles to access the resources.

Reviewer 2: Maybe
```suggestion
You can define role-based policies that allow users with specified roles to access the resources.
```

Reviewer 2: - "It is possible to" > "You can" follows IBM Style guidance to start using "you" more. (Having a warmer more personal tone.)
- Avoid future tense "will" in tech writing. (Tricky to localize in some languages.)
- Place "only" as close as possible to the object it modifies (e.g. "allow only users"), or drop it if possible.

.Example of a role-based policy
[source,properties]
----
quarkus.http.auth.policy.role-policy1.roles-allowed=user,admin                  <1>
----

> <1> This defines a role-based policy that allows users with the `user` and `admin` roles.

Reviewer 2: Maybe:
```suggestion
<1> Allows users with `user` and `admin` roles.
```

> This is referenced by permission sets in the next snippet.

Reviewer 2: Generally, to avoid the linguistic equivalent of a null-pointer error, specify the object following "this". 
```suggestion
This <object> is referenced by permission sets in the next snippet.
```

Author: Will apply this:
Such a custom policy can be referenced by permission sets just like the built-in ones, as shown in the example below.

.Example of policy configuration
[source,properties]
----
quarkus.http.auth.permission.permit1.paths=/public/*                            <1>
quarkus.http.auth.permission.permit1.policy=permit
quarkus.http.auth.permission.permit1.methods=GET

quarkus.http.auth.permission.deny1.paths=/forbidden                             <2>
quarkus.http.auth.permission.deny1.policy=deny

quarkus.http.auth.permission.roles1.paths=/roles-secured/*,/other/*,/api/*      <3>
quarkus.http.auth.permission.roles1.policy=role-policy1
----
<1> This permission references the default `permit` built-in policy to allow `GET` methods to `/public`.
In this case, the demonstrated setting would not affect this example because this request is allowed anyway.
<2> This permission references the built-in `deny` policy for `/forbidden`.
This is an exact path match as it does not end with `*`.
<3> This is a permission set that references the previously defined policy.
`roles1` is an example name; you can call the permission sets whatever you want.

=== Matching on paths, methods

Permission sets can also specify paths and methods as a comma-separated list.

> If a path ends with `*`, it queries for a wildcard match and will match all sub-paths.

Reviewer 2: Maybe:
```suggestion
If a path ends with the `*` wildcard, the query it generates matches all sub-paths.
```

> Otherwise, it queries for an exact match and will only match that specific path:

Reviewer 2: Maybe:
```suggestion
Otherwise, without a wildcard, the query matches the specified path only:
```

include::_attributes.adoc[]
:categories: security,web

> Quarkus has an integrated pluggable web security layer. If security is enabled, all HTTP requests will have a permission

Reviewer 3: @jherrman 

`security is enabled` is OK in this context, we have many ways to enable it, via a specific extension which supports enforcing the sec rules

check performed to make sure they are allowed to continue.

[NOTE]
====

> Configuration authorization checks are executed before any annotation-based authorization check is done, so both

Reviewer 3: It looks like an important piece of information to retain

> Configuration authorization checks are executed before any annotation-based authorization check is done, so both

Author: @jherrman  Both passive voices are caused by the absence of the word Quarkus, which executes and doing the check done. But since this is a Quarkus documentation, maybe it is not necessary.

checks have to pass for a request to be allowed.
This means you cannot use `@PermitAll` to open up a path if the path has been blocked by using the `quarkus.http.auth.` configuration.

If you are using JAX-RS you may want to consider using `quarkus.security.jaxrs.deny-unannotated-endpoints` or `quarkus.security.jaxrs.default-roles-allowed` to set default security requirements instead of HTTP path level matching, as annotations can override these properties on an individual endpoint.
====

Authorization is based on user roles that the security provider provides.
To customize these roles, a `SecurityIdentityAugmentor` can be created, see
xref:security-customization.adoc#security-identity-customization[Security Identity Customization].

== Authorization using configuration

Permissions are defined in configuration using permission sets, with each permission set specifying a policy for access control.

.{project-name} policies summary
|===
s| Built-in policy s| Description
s| `deny` | This policy denies all users.
s| `permit` | This policy permits all users.
s| `authenticated` | This policy permits only authenticated users.
|===

> It is possible to define role-based policies that will only allow users with the specified roles to access the resources.

Reviewer 3: What do you mean ? The established usecase is that the access to the endpoint has to be secured

quarkus.http.auth.permission.deny1.paths=/forbidden                                 <4>
quarkus.http.auth.permission.deny1.policy=deny
----
<1> This defines a role-based policy that allows users with the `user` and `admin` roles. This is referenced by later rules.
<2> This is a permission set that references the previously defined policy.
`roles1` is an arbitrary name; you can call the permission sets whatever you want.
<3> This permission references the default `permit` built-in policy to allow `GET` methods to `/public`.
This is a no-op in this example, as this request would have been allowed anyway.
<4> This permission references the built-in `deny` policy for `/forbidden`.
This is an exact path match as it does not end with `*`.

> 

Reviewer 3: Nice idea to summarize all the options, but I'd consider moving this new addition (lines 54-60) above, just below `Authorization using configuration`, before introducing the examples

> Permissions are defined in config using permission sets.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Permissions are defined in configuration using permission sets.
```

> These are arbitrarily named permission grouping.

Reviewer 3: This sentence looks a bit isolated on its own, I'd just consider dropping it altogether

Author: Sure thing. I only applied one sentence per line, as an upstream council agreed, but yeah, it is redundant.

Each permission set must specify a policy that is used to control access.

> There are three built-in policies: `deny`, `permit`, and `authenticated`, which permit all, deny all, and only allow authenticated users.

Reviewer 3: Would it make sense to collapse the "`deny`, `permit`, and `authenticated`, which permit all, deny all, and only allow authenticated users.`  part into a table ?
Or at least group it a bit differently, `deny` (deny all), `permit` (permit all), and `authenticated` (only allow authenticated users) ?
Right now one order of the follow up descriptions is wrong as well

Reviewer 3: Table should be preferred IMHO as this is what you also did for the section related to the annotations

Author: That will be a no problem. Glad you like the table I created in Annotations section! Will revamp this section too and sent you some designs in DM.

quarkus.http.auth.permission.deny1.policy=deny
----

[NOTE]
====

> Given the above permission set, `GET /public/foo` would match the paths of both permission sets, but because it matches the explicit method of the `permit1` permission set, `permit1` will be chosen, and the request will

Reviewer 2: will > is

Reviewer 2: multiple instances

be accepted.

`PUT /public/foo`, on the other hand, will not match the method permissions of `permit1`, so `deny1` will be activated and reject the request.
====

=== Matching multiple paths and methods: both win

> When multiple permission sets win at the same time per the previously described rules, all these permissions have to allow access for the request to proceed.

Reviewer 2: Maybe
```suggestion
For the request to proceed, when the previously described rules cause multiple permission sets to win at the same time, all these permissions must allow access.
```

quarkus.http.auth.permission.deny1.policy=deny
----

> TIP: Given the above permission set, `GET /public/foo` would match both permission sets' paths, but because it matches the `permit1` permission set's explicit method, `permit1` will be chosen, and the request will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TIP: Given the above permission set, `GET /public/foo` would match the paths of both permission sets, but because it matches the explicit method of the `permit1` permission set, `permit1` will be chosen, and the request will
```

be accepted.
`PUT /public/foo`, on the other hand, will not match the method permissions of `permit1`, so `deny1` will be activated and reject the request.

=== Matching multiple paths and methods: both win

> If multiple permission sets specify the same path and method, or multiple has no method, then both permissions have to allow access for the request to proceed.

Reviewer: Not really sure what the "or multiple has no method" is trying to say, which makes understanding the sentence kinda tricky.

Author: Updating:
When multiple permission sets win at the same time per the previously described rules, all these permissions have to allow access for the request to proceed.

> Note that for this to happen, both have to either have specified the method or have no method; method-specific matches take precedence, as stated above:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that for this to happen, both have to either have specified the method or have no method. Method-specific matches take precedence.
```

quarkus.http.auth.permission.roles2.policy=admin-policy1
----

> TIP: Given the above permission set, `GET /api/foo` would match both permission sets' paths, requiring both the `user` and `admin` roles.

Reviewer: Sounds more like a NOTE to me.

Author: Yeah, true :)

=== Configuration Properties to Deny access

> Three configuration settings alter the RBAC Deny behavior:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following configuration settings alter the RBAC Deny behavior:
```

`quarkus.security.jaxrs.deny-unannotated-endpoints=true|false`::
If set to true, the access will be denied for all JAX-RS endpoints by default, so if a JAX-RS endpoint does not have any security annotations, it will default to the `@DenyAll` behavior.
This is useful to ensure you cannot accidentally expose an endpoint that is supposed to be secured.
Defaults to `false`.

`quarkus.security.jaxrs.default-roles-allowed=role1,role2`::
Defines the default role requirements for unannotated endpoints.

> The role '**' is a special role that means any authenticated user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `**`  role is a special role that means any authenticated user.
```

<4> The call to obtain the user principal returns null if the caller is unauthenticated and non-null if the caller is authenticated.
<5> The `/subject/denied` endpoint declares the `@DenyAll` annotation, thus disallowing all direct access to it as a REST method, regardless of the user calling it. The method is still invokable internally by other methods in this class.

CAUTION: Please refer to the xref:security-built-in-authentication-support-concept.adoc#proactive-authentication[Proactive Authentication] section of the Built-In Authentication Support guide if you plan to use standard security annotations on IO thread.
CAUTION: Please refer to the xref:security-built-in-authentication-support-concept.adoc#proactive-authentication[Proactive Authentication] section of the Built-In Authentication Support guide if you plan to use standard security annotations on the IO thread.

The `@RolesAllowed` annotation value supports <<config-reference#property-expressions,Property Expressions>> including default values and nested Property Expressions.
Configuration properties used with the annotation are resolved at runtime.

> [source,properties]

Reviewer 3: Why this and another example after it are removed ?

Reviewer 4: The purpose of the code example is purely to show how to use variables in the annotation value, I'd say a bullet list of examples (which is what Michal is adding below) is enough, no need for a code example that wraps the usage of variables into a lot of unrelated stuff.

Author: I highly agree

Reviewer 3: @MichalMaler May be I'm missing something, can you paste an image showing how it will look like ?

Author: @sberyozkin I just rebased and applied all the fixes from yours and Jan review. Please have a look here, it should be rendered properly. If not, I will give you some build :)

https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/blob/0ef3d3fbf14702fb961d239b9d9c35c46338e528/docs/src/main/asciidoc/security-authorization-of-web-endpoints-reference.adoc

I think it is a huge simplification update.

Reviewer 3: Not sure if I got the comment from Jan, but I don't agree with getting rid of the examples, unless the reworked doc will let the users click on the link and see the same example

Reviewer 4: @sberyozkin If you look at https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/blob/2.16.0.Final/docs/src/main/asciidoc/security-authorization-of-web-endpoints-reference.adoc#authorization-using-annotations, you see that there are two snippets (`SubjectExposingResource` class) that are quite long and very similar. 

The purpose of the first one is to show how to use annotations. The purpose of the second snippet is specifically to show how to use Property expressions. I don't think that we need to copy (with minimal changes) the whole first snippet just to show how to use property expressions. Most of the code in that second snippet is irrelevant to property expressions.

Reviewer 3: @jmartisk Nonetheless it is useful to have for users to copy and paste, a certain redundancy as far as the associated example code is not a problem IMHO

Reviewer 3: Also seeing an example can help new users understand the idea better, IMHO the more examples the better

Author: Put the example back. My job is currently don. Now I need @sberyozkin to have a look on preview and give me a green light for the final peer review.
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/blob/197069a60b2dc56265a36892b9e7165cb1d0bcbf/docs/src/main/asciidoc/security-authorization-of-web-endpoints-reference.adoc

Reviewer 3: Thanks @MichalMaler
